---
layout: post
title: Understanding IR protocols and decoding the IR codes for Bluestar AC
date: 2024-07-07 00:00:00
description: 
tags: IR codes, Electronics basics
categories: 
tabs: true
---

From my childhood, I was always nosy to know how does the infrared remotes work and what thing lies inside them. So, I along with my friend [Manan Shanghvi](https://www.linkedin.com/in/manan-shanghvi-393537282/) thought of giving it a try and understanding them. 

I decided to work with AC remotes because of the fact that IR codes for AC's are composite and are not just commands, but contain all the necessary information about the operating mode of the AC  and there is usually a check sum as well. While the TV remote just sends a HEX code to its receiver. For example: When you press the volume up button on a TV remote only the volume up command will be sent to the TV receiver, but if you press the temperature increase button on an AC remote its whole setting like heating or cooling, fan power, temperature, jet direction, etc is sent to the AC.

## What is a IR protocol?
According to the definition on the Digikey site, In communications, language is referred to as a protocol, which is nothing more than an agreement between the sender and the recipient of the data. The two parties agree to follow a predefined pattern and transmit the information in a certain way.
The simplest method for transmitting binary values with an IR LED would be to turn the infrared LED on (to send a logical 1) or to leave it turned off (which could represent a logical 0) for a certain period. The sender could do this until all the data bits have been transmitted. Unfortunately, this won’t work in reality since many other sources emit IR radiation. The receiver would not be able to filter out unwanted signals from other sources.
To overcome this issue, the sender is required to pulse the LED on and off very quickly, instead of just turning it on and off. Typically, a frequency of 38 kHz is used, and this is also referred to as the carrier frequency of the IR signal. Note that other wavelengths and carrier frequencies are also possible — for example, 940 nm and 36 kHz. However, in reality, that doesn’t seem to be a problem. Most IR receivers will still work with slight variations in wavelength and carrier frequency.
<!-- 
If you want to read more about IR protocols, refer this docs [1](https://www.vishay.com/docs/80071/dataform.pdf), [2](https://docs.kernel.org/userspace-api/media/rc/rc-protos.html#:~:text=IR%20is%20encoded%20as%20a,devices%20for%20a%20given%20protocol.). -->